To formulate the model , we used a rule - based approach , which simplifies the consideration of site - specific details ( e.g. , tracking the phosphorylation status of amino acid residues ) [51] .
We used the model - specification language of BioNetGen , which is called BNGL , to define the types of molecules included in our model and to write rules for interactions .
The conventions of BNGL are described elsewhere in detail [52,53] .
A rule provides necessary and sufficient conditions for occurrence of an interaction and a rate law that governs all reactions implied by the rule .
The model accounts for seven types of molecules : ( FKBP1A - bound ) rapamycin , a natural product , and the proteins AMPK , MTOR , RPTOR , ULK 1 , EIF4EBP 1 , and AMBRA 1 .
The model includes 27 unidirectional rules and 2 bidirectional rules .
Below , we present and discuss the BNGL - encoded molecule type definitions and rules that comprise the model .
The focus of this section is on explaining the formal representation of molecules considered in the model .
Rapamycin in complex with FKBP1A ( UniProt entry P62942 ) binds MTOR [17,18] , which prevents MTOR from associating with RPTOR [54] .
For simplicity , we only consider the form of rapamycin in complex with FKBP1A , which we denote as rapamycin * .
In the model , this form of rapamycin is named rapa and is taken to have a single component named mtor , which is responsible for interaction with MTOR : rapa ( mtor ) The level of rapamycin * is treated as an input .
The level of rapamycin * is not affected by the dynamics captured in the model .
We chose to study responses to rapamycin rather than physiological stimuli , such as amino acids or growth factors , because rapamycin treatment is a stimulus that can be readily manipulated in the laboratory and rapamycin directly modulates MTORC 1 activity .
Regulation of MTORC 1 activity in response to physiological stimuli is less direct and mediated by a complex regulatory network , which integrates multiple signals .
As a simplification , we only consider the form of AMPK with activating phosphorylation in its kinase domain , i.e. , the form of AMPK with phosphorylation at T172 ( T183 ) in the PRKAA 2 ( PRKAA 1 ) isoform of the α subunit of AMPK ( UniProt entries P54646 and Q13131 ) .
We denote this form of AMPK as AMPK * .
In the model , AMPK * interacts directly with ULK 1 via an undefined region in AMPK * .
Furthermore , AMPK * phosphorylates sites in RPTOR and ULK 1 , and AMPK * is a substrate of ULK 1 .
The kinase domain of AMPK * is considered implicitly .
We represent AMPK * as follows : formtok
The ulk 1 component represents the undefined region in AMPK * that mediates interaction with ULK 1 .
The ST component represents serine / threonine residues in the α subunit of AMPK that are phosphorylated by ULK 1 .
This component is taken to have an internal state , which is either “ unphosphorylated ” ( 0 ) or “ phosphorylated ” ( P ) .
Internal states are abstractions useful for representing local properties of sites , such as location , conformation , or post - translational modification status .
In a molecule type definition , the names of all possible internal states of a site are listed after the name of that site , with each state name being prefixed by a tilde .
The level of AMPK * is treated as an input .
The level of AMPK * is not affected by the dynamics captured in the model .
MTOR ( UniProt entry P42345 ) interacts directly with rapamycin * and RPTOR [54] .
The interactions with rapamycin * and RPTOR , which are mutually exclusive , are mediated by the FRB domain and HEAT repeats in MTOR , respectively [17,18,54] .
Furthermore , MTOR , when part of MTORC 1 , phosphorylates substrates in ULK 1 [10,14,55] and EIF4EBP 1 [56,57] .
We consider the kinase domain of MTOR implicitly .
Thus , MTOR is represented as follows : MTOR ( HEAT , FRB ) In the model , MTOR ’ s kinase is taken to be active when bound to RPTOR , such that only MTOR in complex with RPTOR is able to phosphorylate substrates .
As a simplification , the only components of MTORC 1 that we track in our model are MTOR and RPTOR .
Thus , the complex of MTOR and RPTOR is taken to be equivalent to MTORC 1 .
RPTOR ( UniProt entry Q8N 122 ) interacts directly with MTOR , ULK 1 , and EIF4EBP 1 .
The interactions with MTOR and EIF4EBP 1 are mediated by WD 40 repeats and the RNC domain in RPTOR , respectively .
The interaction with ULK 1 is mediated by an undefined region in RPTOR .
Several sites in RPTOR , including S792 , S855 , and S859 , are substrates of AMPK and / or ULK 1 [11,15] .
We represent RPTOR as follows : formtok
The ulk 1 component represents the undefined region in RPTOR that mediates interaction with ULK 1 .
The S792 component is allowed to have one of two internal states : 0 , which is taken to represent the unphosphorylated form of S792 , or P , which is taken to represent the phosphorylated form of S792 .
As a simplification , the S855 and S859 residues are lumped together and represented by a single component named S855 _ S859 .
This component is taken to have one of three internal states : unphosphorylated ( 0 ) , singly phosphorylated ( P ) , or doubly phosphorylated ( PP ) .
ULK 1 ( UniProt entry O75385 ) interacts directly with RPTOR and AMPK ; these interactions are mediated by undefined regions within the proline / serine - rich ( PS ) domain of ULK 1 [10] .
Several sites in ULK 1 , including S317 , S758 , and S778 , are substrates of MTORC 1 or AMPK , and ULK 1 phosphorylates several substrates in RPTOR , AMPK and AMBRA 1 .
We consider the kinase domain of ULK 1 implicitly .
Thus , ULK 1 is represented as follows : formtok
The components named straptor and stampk represent the undefined regions responsible for interactions with RPTOR and AMPK .
The component S758 is a substrate of MTORC 1 , and the components S317 and S778 are substrates of AMPK .
These components are each taken to have one of two internal states : unphosphorylated ( 0 ) or phosphorylated ( P ) .
In the model , ULK 1 ’ s kinase is taken to be active when phosphorylated at both S317 and S778 and not phosphorylated at S758 .
When recruited to RPTOR via its RCR domain , EIF4EBP 1 ( UniProt entry Q13541 ) can be phosphorylated by MTORC 1 at several sites , including T37 , T46 , S65 and T70 [58] .
Phosphorylation of S65 and T70 is more sensitive to rapamycin treatment than T37 and T46 [59,60] .
Thus , we represent EIF4EBP 1 as follows : formtok
As can be seen , as a simplification , we represent S65 and T70 ( and other less rapamycin sensitive sites ) together by a single component named S65 _ T70 .
This component is taken to have an internal state : either unphosphorylated ( 0 ) or phosphorylated ( P ) .
EIF4EBP 1 is included in the model as a representative of MTORC 1 substrates involved in regulating translation .
EIF4EBP 1 represses translation when hypophosphorylated and is inert when phosphorylated by MTORC 1 .
AMBRA 1 ( UniProt entry Q9C 0C 7 ) is phosphorylated by ULK 1 .
We represent AMBRA 1 as follows : formtok
The ST component represents serine / threonine residues that are phosphorylated by ULK 1 .
This component is taken to have an internal state : either unphosphorylated ( 0 ) or phosphorylated ( P ) .
AMBRA 1 is included in the model as a reporter of ULK 1 kinase activity and autophagy level .
Phosphorylation of AMBRA 1 by ULK 1 promotes autophagy .
The focus of this section is on explaining the formal representation of interactions considered in the model .
The interactions discussed here are those that seemed most relevant for understanding mutual inhibition of MTORC 1 and ULK 1 after a literature search aimed at identifying interactions among AMPK , MTORC 1 , and ULK 1 .
Not all known interactions among this triad are included in the model ; omitted interactions are considered below and also in the Discussion section .
FKBP1A - bound rapamycin ( rapamycin * ) can interact with MTOR provided that MTOR is not bound to RPTOR .
Rapamycin * binding to MTOR and RPTOR binding to MTOR are mutually exclusive .
We represent reversible binding of rapamycin * to MTOR as follows : formtok where a1 and d1 are the forward and reverse rate constants for this interaction .
Note that the rule of Equation ( 1 ) has both a forward and reverse direction , as indicated by the symbol “ < - > . ” Thus , the rule can be read from left to right , or right to left ; it is one of the two reversible rules included in the model .
As indicated by sharing of the bond index “ 1 ” by the mtor and FRB components on the right - hand side of the rule in Equation ( 1 ) , rapamycin * binds the FRB domain in MTOR . ( Bond indices are prefixed by an exclamation mark . ) Inclusion of the HEAT component in the left - hand side of Equation ( 1 ) without specification of a binding partner indicates that this component must be free in order for the rule to be applicable .
This constraint is introduced to ensure that rapamycin * and RPTOR bind MTOR with mutual exclusivity .
In the model , only RPTOR interacts with HEAT repeats in MTOR .
Thus , the rule of Equation ( 1 ) indicates that MTOR must be free of RPTOR to interact with rapamycin * .
We note that the reverse ( i.e. , right - to - left ) reading of the rule of Equation ( 1 ) indicates that the HEAT repeats in MTOR must be free in order for rapamycin * to dissociate from MTOR .
Writing the rule with this restriction , which is spurious ( but inconsequential for the model as specified ) , has the benefit of allowing for concise specification of the forward and reverse rules for binding of rapamycin * to MTOR .
Only a single line of BNGL code is necessary .
The restriction has no consequence whatsoever because the rules of the model never allow the HEAT and FRB sites in MTOR to be bound at the same time .
If the model were modified in some way to allow simultaneous binding of these sites , then the rule of Equation ( 1 ) would likely need to be rewritten as two separate , unidirectional rules .
RPTOR can interact with MTOR provided that MTOR is not bound to rapamycin * .
We represent reversible binding of RPTOR to MTOR as follows : formtok where a2 and d2 are the forward and reverse rate constants for this interaction .
As indicated , WD 40 repeats in RPTOR interact with HEAT repeats in MTOR .
Inclusion of the FRB component in the left - hand side of Equation ( 2 ) without specification of a binding partner indicates that this component must be free in order for the rule to be applicable .
In the model , only rapamycin * interacts with FRB domain in MTOR .
Thus , the rule of Equation ( 2 ) indicates that MTOR must be free of rapamycin * in order to interact with RPTOR .
RPTOR can interact reversibly with ULK 1 .
This interaction , which is mediated by undefined regions in RPTOR and ULK 1 , is destabilized by phosphorylation of RPTOR at S792 , S855 , and S859 .
We represent reversible binding of RPTOR to ULK 1 using three unidirectional rules , as follows : formtok \ formtok RPTOR ( ulk 1 ! 1 ) .ULK 1 ( straptor ! 1 ) - > RPTOR ( ulk 1 ) + ULK 1 ( straptor ) d3 ( 3B ) formtok \ formtok
Note that unidirectionality is indicated by the symbol “ - > . ” A unidirectional rule is only read from left to right .
The first rule , Equation ( 3A ) , indicates that RPTOR , when free of EIF4EBP 1 ( which binds the RNC domain in RPTOR ) and not phosphorylated at S792 , S855 , and S859 , is able to associate with ULK 1 with rate constant a3 . ( This rule requires that the cognate binding sites in RPTOR and ULK 1 , which are represented by the components named ulk 1 and straptor , be free . ) The second rule , Equation ( 3B ) , indicates that RPTOR is able to dissociate from ULK 1 with rate constant d3 .
Dissociation can occur whenever a bond between RPTOR and ULK 1 exists .
In other words , according to this rule , there are no contextual constraints on dissociation .
The third rule , Equation ( 3C ) , indicates that dissociation occurs with a different rate constant , d3max ( > d3 ) , when the indicated sites in RPTOR are phosphorylated .
We note that a backslash ( \ ) is used to mark a line break in BNGL .
RPTOR can interact reversibly with EIF4EBP 1 .
This interaction occurs between the RNC domain in RPTOR and the RCR domain in EIF4EBP 1 .
We represent reversible binding of RPTOR to EIF4EBP 1 using two unidirectional rules , as follows : formtok \ formtok RPTOR ( RNC ! 1 ) .EIF 4EBP 1 ( RCR ! 1 ) - > RPTOR ( RNC ) + EIF4EBP 1 ( RCR ) d4 ( 4B ) The first rule , Equation ( 4A ) , indicates that RPTOR , when free of ULK 1 ( which interacts with an undefined region in RPTOR that we refer to as ulk 1 ) and not phosphorylated at S792 , S855 , and S859 , is able to associate with EIF4EBP 1 with rate constant a4 .
The sites that mediate association , the RNC domain in RPTOR and the RCR domain in EIF4EBP 1 , must be free and available for interaction , as indicated .
The second rule , Equation ( 4B ) , indicates that RPTOR is able to dissociate from EIF4EBP 1 with rate constant d4 .
AMPK can interact reversibly with ULK 1 .
This interaction occurs between an undefined region in AMPK , denoted ulk 1 , and an undefined region in ULK 1 , denoted stampk .
We represent reversible binding of AMPK to ULK 1 using two unidirectional rules , as follows : formtok formtok AMPK ( ulk 1 ! 1 ) .ULK 1 ( stampk ! 1 ) - > AMPK ( ulk 1 ) + ULK 1 ( stampk ) d5 ( 5B ) The first rule , Equation ( 5A ) , indicates that AMPK , when phosphorylated at T172 and free of ULK 1 , is able to associate with ULK 1 , provided that ULK 1 is not phosphorylated at S758 .
Recall that phosphorylation of S758 inhibits AMPK - ULK 1 interaction .
Association of AMPK and ULK 1 occurs with rate constant a5 .
The sites ulk 1 and stampk must be free for association to occur , as indicated .
The second rule , Equation ( 5B ) , indicates that AMPK is able to dissociate from ULK 1 with rate constant d5 .
MTORC 1 phosphorylates ULK 1 at S758 : We represent MTORC 1 - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of ULK 1 at S758 using a unidirectional rule , as follows : formtok \ MTOR ( HEAT ! 1 ) .RPTOR ( WD 40 ! 1 , ulk 1 ! 2 ) .ULK 1 ( straptor ! 2 , stampk , S758 ~ P ) p1 ( 6 ) where p1 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
This rule requires that the stampk site in ULK 1 be free ( of AMPK ) in order for MTORC 1 to phosphorylate S758 .
This requirement is introduced for the following reason .
It is known that phosphorylation of S758 prevents AMPK from binding ULK 1 .
Thus , we assume that S758 is in the interface between these two proteins .
If this assumption is correct , then it follows that S758 should not be accessible for phosphorylation when ULK 1 is bound to AMPK ( i.e. , when the stampk site is bound ) .
The rule of Equation ( 6 ) indicates that phosphorylation of S758 by MTORC 1 further requires MTOR , RPTOR and ULK 1 to be together in a complex .
In the model , this complex forms through association of RPTOR with MTOR according to Equation ( 2 ) and through association of RPTOR with ULK 1 according to Equation ( 3 ) .
The order of association events is of no importance .
In the model , components of MTORC 1 beyond MTOR and RPTOR ( e.g. , MLST 8 ) are considered implicitly .
We assume that MTORC 1 is fully formed and competent to phosphorylate substrates whenever MTOR and RPTOR are in association .
Phosphorylation of S758 in ULK 1 is inhibitory because phosphorylation of this residue prevents AMPK from binding ULK 1 ( see Equation ( 5A ) ) .
MTORC 1 phosphorylates EIF4EBP 1 at S65 and T70 : We represent MTORC 1 - mediated phosphorylation of S65 and T70 in EIF4EBP 1 using a unidirectional rule , as follows : formtok where p2 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
Equation ( 7 ) indicates that phosphorylation of S65 and T70 requires MTOR , RPTOR and EIF4EBP 1 to be together in a complex .
Recall that S65 and T70 in EIF4EBP 1 are represented , for simplicity , as a single component named S65 _ T70 . ( See the molecule type definition for EIF4EBP 1 . ) ULK 1 phosphorylates RPTOR at S792 , S855 , and S859 : We represent ULK 1 - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of S792 , S855 , and S859 in RPTOR using three unidirectional rules , as follows : formtok formtok formtok formtok formtok formtok where p3 and p4 are ( pseudo first - order ) rate constants .
As indicated , phosphorylation of S792 , S855 , and S859 in RTPOR by ULK 1 requires that RPTOR and ULK 1 be connected through the binding sites ulk 1 in RPTOR and straptor in ULK 1 .
Phosphorylation of S317 and S778 in ULK 1 , which makes straptor competent for interaction with ulk 1 in RPTOR , is an additional prerequisite for ULK 1 - mediated phosphorylation of S792 , S855 , and S859 in RPTOR .
Recall that S855 and S858 in RPTOR are represented , for simplicity , as a single component named S855 _ S859 , which is allowed to be unphosphorylated ( 0 ) , singly phosphorylated ( P ) , or doubly phosphorylated ( PP ) . ( See the molecule type definition for RPTOR . ) The rate constant in the rule of Equation ( 8B ) is specified as twice that for the rule of Equation ( 8C ) because the 0 to P state transition for site S855 _ S859 ( i.e. , the transition from an unphosphorylated state to a singly phosphorylated state ) is expected to occur twice as fast as the P to PP transition ( i.e. , the transition from a singly to doubly phosphorylated state ) .
ULK 1 phosphorylates AMBRA 1 at S / T residues : We represent ULK 1 - mediated phosphorylation of AMBRA 1 at undefined serine and threonine ( S / T ) residues using a unidirectional rule , as follows : formtok formtok where p5 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
Equation ( 9 ) indicates that ULK 1 , when phosphorylated at S317 and S778 and not bound to RPTOR ( i.e. , when the straptor site in ULK 1 is free ) , is able to phosphorylate AMBRA 1 at undefined S / T residues , which are represented as a single component named ST .
This rule reflects the inhibitory effect of RPTOR on ULK 1 kinase activity and the requirement for activating phosphorylation at S317 and S778 , which is mediated by AMPK .
Note that ULK 1 and AMBRA 1 are not required to form a complex for ULK 1 - mediated phosphorylation of AMBRA 1 to occur .
Thus , we are assuming that the enzymatic reactions defined by the rule of Equation ( 9 ) are occurring in the regime of substrate limitation , far from enzyme saturation .
ULK 1 phosphorylates AMPK at S / T residues : We represent ULK 1 - mediated phosphorylation of AMPK at undefined serine and threonine residues using a unidirectional rule , as follows : formtok formtok where p6 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
The rule of Equation ( 10 ) is the same as that of Equation ( 9 ) except that the ULK 1 substrates , which are represented by the component named ST , are in AMPK instead of AMBRA 1 .
AMPK phosphorylates ULK 1 at S317 and S778 : We represent AMPK - mediated activating phosphorylation of ULK 1 at S317 and S778 using two unidirectional rules , as follows : formtok formtok formtok formtok where p7 and p8 are ( pseudo first - order ) rate constants .
Each rule indicates that AMPK kinase activity requires 1 ) phosphorylation at T172 in the kinase domain of the PRKAA 2 isoform of the α subunit ( or equivalently , phosphorylation at T183 in the kinase domain of the PRKAA 1 isoform of the α subunit ) , 2 ) the absence of phosphorylation at S / T residues in the α subunit outside the kinase domain , and 3 ) association of AMPK with ULK 1 , which is mediated by the ulk 1 and stampk sites in AMPK and ULK 1 , respectively .
Furthermore , AMPK - mediated phosphorylation of S317 in ULK 1 , but not S778 , requires that ULK 1 be free of RPTOR ( i.e. , the straptor site in ULK 1 must be free ) .
The reason for this constraint is that RPTOR appears to mask S317 when bound to ULK 1 , which would prevent phosphorylation of S317 by AMPK .
RPTOR interacts with the PS domain in ULK 1 , which contains S317 [10,55] .
AMPK phosphorylates RPTOR at S792 : We represent AMPK - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of RPTOR at S792 using a unidirectional rule , as follows : formtok where p9 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
Equation ( 12 ) indicates that AMPK * , regardless of the phosphorylation status of S / T residues in the α subunit outside the kinase domain ( i.e. , regardless of the internal state of the ST component of AMPK ) , is able to phosphorylate RPTOR at S792 .
Note that AMPK and RPTOR are not required to form a complex for AMPK - mediated phosphorylation of RPTOR to occur .
Thus , we are assuming that the enzymatic reactions defined by the rule of Equation ( 12 ) are occurring in the regime of substrate limitation , far from enzyme saturation .
Dephosphorylation of S758 in ULK 1 : We represent dephosphorylation of S758 in ULK 1 as follows : formtok where u0 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
In most cases , for simplicity , rules for dephosphorylation reactions are assigned the dephosphorylation rate constant u0 .
We assume that dephosphorylation reactions are mediated by constitutively active ( i.e. , unregulated ) phosphatases , which are taken to be present in excess .
This rule exemplifies our treatment of phosphatases , which generally are not as well characterized as kinases .
Dephosphorylation of S65 and T70 in EIF4EBP 1 : We represent dephosphorylation of S65 and T70 in EIF4EBP 1 as follows : formtok where u0 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
This rule is similar to that of Equation ( 12 ) .
Dephosphorylation of S792 , S855 and S859 in RPTOR : We represent dephosphorylation of S792 , S855 and S859 in RPTOR as follows : formtok formtok formtok where u0 and u1 are ( pseudo first - order ) rate constants .
We assume that S792 in RPTOR is dephosphorylated more slowly than typical sites considered in the model .
Consequently , the rule of Equation ( 15A ) is assigned the rate constant u1 ( instead of u0 ) .
The rate constant in the rule of Equation ( 15C ) is specified as twice that for the rule of Equation ( 15B ) because the PP to P state transition for site S855 _ S859 is expected to occur twice as fast as the P to 0 transition .
Dephosphorylation of S / T residues in AMBRA 1 : We represent dephosphorylation of S / T residues in AMBRA 1 as follows : formtok
This rule is similar to that of Equation ( 13 ) .
Dephosphorylation of ST residues in AMPK : We represent dephosphorylation of S / T residues in AMPK as follows : formtok where u2 is a ( pseudo first - order ) rate constant .
We assume that S / T residues in AMPK are dephosphorylated more slowly than typical sites considered in the model , so the rule of Equation ( 17 ) is assigned the rate constant u2 ( instead of u0 ) .
This rule is otherwise similar to that of Equation ( 13 ) .
Dephosphorylation of S317 and S778 in ULK 1 : We represent dephosphorylation of S317 and S778 in ULK 1 as follows : formtok formtok
These rules are similar to that of Equation ( 13 ) except that the rule of Equation ( 18A ) imposes a constraint on dephosphorylation of S317 in ULK 1 .
Namely , dephosphorylation of this site is only allowed to occur when ULK 1 is free of RPTOR ( or equivalently , the straptor site in ULK 1 is free ) .
This requirement is introduced because S317 overlaps with the straptor site .
We assume that S317 cannot be phosphorylated or dephosphorylated when RPTOR is in contact with the straptor site .
Dephosphorylation of S792 in RPTOR : We represent dephosphorylation of S792 in RPTOR as follows : formtok
This rule is similar to that of Equation ( 13 ) .
Even though the interactions considered in our model are fairly well established , information about the quantitative factors that influence these interactions ( e.g. , rate constants and concentrations ) is scarce .
To cope with this knowledge gap , we assigned values to the parameters of the model , which are summarized in Table 1 , somewhat arbitrarily within ranges deemed to be reasonable , and we eschewed fine - tuning of parameter values .
Thus , for each rate constant , we only specified an order of magnitude ( i.e. , we only used a single significant digit , 1 ) .
To offset uncertainty about parameter values , we focused on qualitative system behavior through bifurcation analyses and we also performed a systematic parameter sensitivity analysis .
Our rationale for setting parameter values is further explained below .
Rate constants for dephosphorylation reactions : The model includes 10 rules for dephosphorylation reactions , which are given by Equations ( 13 ) - ( 19 ) .
Each of these rules is associated with a rate constant and , in accordance with the conventions of BNGL , a mass - action rate law that has this rate constant as its only parameter .
We associated 8 of the 10 rules for dephosphorylation with a common rate constant , u0 .
We set the nominal value of u0 at 10 − 2 s − 1 ( Table 1 ) .
This setting essentially establishes the characteristic response time of the system , which is on the order of minutes [14] .
Shang et al . [14] observed that inhibitory phosphorylation of ULK 1 decreased over a period of minutes after activation of autophagy through starvation or rapamycin treatment .
We associated the rule of Equation ( 15A ) , which characterizes dephosphorylation of S792 in RPTOR , with the rate constant u1 .
We set the nominal value of u1 at 10 times less than the value of u0 ( Table 1 ) .
This setting is motivated by interactions of phosphorylated S792 ( pS 792 ) with 14 - 3 - 3 proteins , which are known to protect pS 792 from dephosphorylation [11] .
Thus , by setting u1 = 0.1 u0 , we are implicitly considering the 14 - 3 - 3 binding partners of pS 792 and accounting for shielding of pS 792 from phosphatases by these binding partners .
We associated the rule of Equation ( 15A ) , which characterizes dephosphorylation of the serine / threonine residues in AMPK that are substrates of ULK 1 , with the rate constant u2 .
We set the nominal value of at u2 at 100 times less than the value of u0 ( Table 1 ) .
By setting u2 = 0.01 u0 , we are assuming that the time scale of negative feedback from ULK 1 to AMPK is much slower than the time required to respond to a stress stimulus .
A slower time scale is necessary to allow for a period of autophagy , i.e. , a period during which ULK 1 kinase activity is sustained , which is presumably required for autophagosome production .
Fast negative feedback would quickly shut off ULK 1 activity after a stress stimulus , potentially severely limiting autophagy .
Rate constants for phosphorylation reactions : The model includes 10 rules for phosphorylation reactions , which are given by Equations ( 6 ) - ( 12 ) .
Each rule is associated with a rate constant .
We assigned the phosphorylation rate constants p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p7 , and p8 a common nominal value , 10 s − 1 ( Table 1 ) .
The value assigned to these rate constants is high ( cf . the value assigned to u0 , 0.01 s − 1 ) because each of these rate constants characterizes a pseudo first - order reaction in which an enzyme and one of its substrates are colocalized within a protein complex , i.e. , confined together within a small reaction volume .
The remaining phosphorylation rate constants , p5 , p6 , and p9 , characterize pseudo second - order reactions .
We assume that each of these ( overall ) reactions corresponds to a Michaelis - Menten reaction scheme operating in the regime of substrate limitation , far from enzyme saturation .
Thus , each second - order rate constant corresponds to a ratio of the form kcat / KM .
We set the nominal value of p5 at 10 − 4 formtok ( Table 1 ) .
This setting is arbitrary and has little influence on predicted system behavior ( Fig . 8 ) because p5 characterizes ULK 1 - mediated phosphorylation of AMBRA 1 .
In the model , AMBRA 1 phosphorylation serves as a reporter of ULK 1 kinase activity .
We set the nominal value of p6 , which characterizes ULK 1 - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of AMPK ( i.e. , the strength of negative feedback ) , at 10 − 6 ( molecule / cell ) formtok ( Table 1 ) .
In initial exploratory simulations , this parameter setting was found to allow for both robust activation of autophagy and nearly complete inhibition of autophagy through negative feedback from ULK 1 to AMPK .
It should be noted that ULK 1 is responsible for phosphorylating multiple serine / threonine residues in AMPK , which in the model are lumped together .
Thus , p6 is an effective rate constant .
We set the nominal value of p9 , which characterizes AMPK - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of RPTOR , at 0 ( Table 1 ) .
In initial exploratory simulations , we found that phosphorylation of S792 in RPTOR by AMPK limits the region of bistability ( in the case without negative feedback from ULK 1 to AMPK ) and the region of oscillatory behavior ( in the case with negative feedback from ULK 1 to AMPK ) in the parameter space of inputs .
Thus , we set the nominal value of p9 to 0 , and we gave non - zero values of p9 special attention in our evaluation of the model .
In other words , we performed bifurcation analyses in which p9 was a bifurcation parameter ( Fig . 7 ) .
Rate constants for association and dissociation reactions : The model includes two reversible rules and seven unidirectional rules for association / dissociation reactions , which are given by Equations ( 1 ) - ( 5 ) .
The rules are associated with a total of 11 rate constants .
Nominal values for the rate constants of association and dissociation reactions ( Table 1 ) were set with the considerations noted below in mind .
We selected values for a1 , d1 , a2 , and d2 such that the affinity of rapamycin * for MTOR is 10 - fold greater than the affinity of RPTOR for MTOR .
In other words , we selected values for these rate constants such that a1 / d1 = 10 a2 / d2 .
This approach is motivated by the ability of rapamycin to disrupt binding of RPTOR to MTOR [61] .
In initial exploratory simulations , we found that the rate constants governing ULK 1 interactions with AMPK and RPTOR affect the bias of a cell toward translation ( or autophagy ) .
An increase in the affinity of ULK 1 for AMPK makes a cell more prone for autophagy .
Conversely , an increase in the affinity of ULK 1 for RPTOR makes a cell more prone for translation .
Thus , we selected values for a3 , d3 , a5 , and d5 that yield roughly balanced propensities for translation and autophagy .
The value of d3 , max was set such that d3 , max is much greater than d3 : we set d3 , max = 100 d3 .
Recall that RPTOR , when phosphorylated at particular residues , dissociates from ULK 1 faster than it otherwise would ( cf . Equations ( 3B ) and ( 3C ) ) .
The rate constant d3 characterizes slow dissociation of RPTOR from ULK 1 and the rate constant d3 , max characterizes fast dissociation of RPTOR from ULK 1 .
Finally , we selected values for a4 and d4 , which govern interaction of EIF4EBP 1 with RPTOR , so as to avoid sequestration of MTORC 1 by EIF4EBP 1 .
Recall that EIF4EBP 1 is included in the model simply to serve as a reporter of MTORC 1 kinase activity .
In U2OS cells , for example , the total cellular abundances of ULK 1 and AMBRA 1 are on the order of 104 copies per cell , whereas the total cellular abundances of AMPK , MTOR , RPTOR , and EIF4EBP 1 are far greater , roughly on the order of 106 copies per cell [62] .
We assume that all proteins are present at effective concentrations of around 104 copies per cell .
This assumption is introduced to account for sequestration of AMPK and MTORC 1 away from ULK 1 by their binding partners not considered in the model , as well as the different spatial distributions of ULK 1 and MTORC 1 ( punctate and localized to membrane sites of autophagosome formation in the case of ULK 1 vs . cytosolic and lysosomally localized in the case of MTORC 1 ) [40,63] .
Comparable effective levels of ULK 1 and MTORC 1 is consistent with the observation that ULK 1 , through phosphorylation of RPTOR , is able to relieve inhibition of autophagy by MTORC 1 , which seems unlikely if the entire pool of MTORC 1 in a cell is available to interact with ULK 1 .
We set concentrations or copy numbers as follows .
We set the abundances of MTOR and RPTOR to be equal , at 2 × 104 copies per cell .
This setting was guided by the 1 : 1 stoichiometry of MTOR and RPTOR in MTORC 1 .
We set the abundance of ULK 1 at half the abundance of MTOR , 104 copies per cell .
It is important for ULK 1 to be less abundant than MTORC 1 so that MTORC 1 is able to fully repress ULK 1 while some fraction of MTORC 1 remains available to interact with EIF4EBP 1 , which is included in the model as a reporter for translation activity .
Full repression of ULK 1 seems reasonable because autophagy can be repressed to undetectable levels when cells are not stressed .
The levels of EIF4EBP 1 and AMBRA 1 were set at 104 copies per cell .
These settings are largely inconsequential for predicted system behavior , because there is no feedback from these proteins to other molecules that are considered in the model .
Recall that EIF4EBP 1 and AMBRA 1 are included in the model only for the purpose of providing readouts of MTORC 1 and ULK 1 activities , which presumably correlate with translation and autophagy levels .
We treat the levels of AMPK * and rapamycin * as controllable inputs .
Recall that AMPK * is distinct from total AMPK and active AMPK .
Our model omits several known interactions among the proteins of interest .
Furthermore , AMPK , RPTOR , and ULK 1 each contain more sites of phosphorylation than are included in the model .
These interactions and sites , which are discussed below , were omitted to keep the model as simple as possible .
Some of the omitted sites have roles similar to sites included in the model .
In RPTOR , S863 and S877 are additional substrates of ULK 1 that are involved in ULK 1 - mediated inhibition of MTORC 1 kinase activity [15] .
In ULK 1 , S479 and S556 appear to play a role analogous to that of S758 ; in other words , they appear to be additional substrates of MTORC 1 involved in MTORC 1 - mediated inhibition of ULK 1 kinase activity [14] .
Besides S317 and S778 , ULK 1 contains additional sites phosphorylated by AMPK , including S467 , S555 , S637 , and T659 , which are involved in activation of ULK 1 [64,65,66] .
The model does not individually consider the multiple serine / threonine substrates of ULK 1 that are found in the catalytic α subunit of AMPK , which are involved in negative feedback regulation of AMPK by ULK 1 [24] .
Instead , these sites are lumped together , i.e. , they are treated as a single site .
One of the omitted sites has an unclear functional role .
Shang et al . [14] reported that ULK 1 is phosphorylated at S638 by both AMPK and MTORC 1 .
This finding is enigmatic because phosphorylation of other sites in ULK 1 by MTORC 1 has an inhibitory effect on ULK 1 kinase activity , whereas phosphorylation of other sites in ULK 1 by AMPK has an activating effect .
Thus , the role of S638 may be distinct from that of other AMPK and MTORC 1 substrates .
Because the role of this site is unclear , we did not include S638 in the model .
In formulating the model , we focused on interactions among AMPK , MTORC 1 , and ULK 1 , because this triad of kinases is recognized as playing a critical role in regulation of autophagy and translation [50] .
However , the triad network is embedded within a larger regulatory network .
Below , we call attention to complicating features of this larger network , which are beyond the scope of this study but that are , under certain conditions , likely to affect the behavior of the triad network .
It is important to call attention to these complicating features to recognize the limitations of the present study .
Recently , Nazio et al . [38] reported positive feedback from AMBRA 1 to ULK 1 .
In this feedback loop , ULK 1 - activated AMBRA 1 interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF 6 , which enables TRAF 6 to mediate the attachment of K63 - linked chains of ubiquitin to ULK 1 , which stabilizes ULK 1 kinase activity .
Interestingly , AMBRA 1 - mediated ubiquitylation of ULK 1 is antagonized by MTORC 1 - mediated phosphorylation of S52 in AMBRA 1 , which provides an additional ( indirect ) avenue for MTORC 1 to inhibit ULK 1 [38] , which could strengthen the robustness of oscillatory behavior .
In the model , we included AMBRA 1 only as a reporter of ULK 1 kinase activity , essentially considering a situation where , for simplicity , positive feedback from AMBRA 1 to ULK 1 is abrogated .
Likewise , we did not consider negative feedback regulation of MTOR by amino acids generated through autophagy [28] , which is similar to but distinct from negative feedback regulation of AMPK by ULK 1 .
In addition to being a component of MTORC 1 , MTOR is a component of a second complex ( MTORC 2 ) , which is distinguished by the subunit RICTOR .
Following growth factor simulation , MTORC 2 promotes full activation of AKT , which subsequently signals downstream to MTORC 1 [67] .
Although rapamycin is largely selective for MTORC 1 , on long time scales ( e.g. , 24 hours ) , rapamycin causes dissociation of MTORC 2 [68] .
Thus , it should be understood that in our analyses we are considering responses to rapamycin on relatively short time scales .
As mentioned earlier , our model simplifies the regulation of MTORC 1 by AMPK .
It is well established that AMPK positively regulates TSC 2 ( within the TSC complex , which also consists of TSC 1 and TBC1D 7 ) via phosphorylation , which in turn suppresses the activity of the small GTPase RHEB , a direct activator of MTORC 1 [45] .
For simplicity , our model considers only the more direct route by which AMPK regulates MTORC 1 , which is achieved through phosphorylation of RPTOR .
Simulations , bifurcation analysis , and sensitivity analysis : We performed simulations using a deterministic method available within BioNetGen [53] .
This method , which is an indirect method , involves first processing the rules of the model specification ( S1 File ) to obtain the reaction network implied by the rules , as well as the corresponding ordinary differential equations ( ODEs ) for mass - action kinetics .
The reaction network consists of 173 chemical species and 6,581 unidirectional reactions . ( The size of the reaction network reflects the number of protein phosphoforms and protein complexes that can arise from the interactions represented by the rules of the model . ) BioNetGen ’ s built - in ODE solver , CVODE from the SUNDIALS package [69] , was then used to numerically integrate the ODEs , using default settings .
The steps described above were performed automatically by BioNetGen and invoked using point - and - click commands available within RuleBender [70] , which provides a graphical user interface for accessing BioNetGen ’ s capabilities .
Each one - dimensional bifurcation analysis was performed numerically as follows .
We added a rule to the model specification ( S1 File ) that has the form 0 - > p k _ epsilon or p - > 0 k _ epsilon , where 0 is a source or sink , p is the bifurcation parameter , and k _ epsilon is sufficiently small .
The added rule has the effect of either very slowly increasing or very slowly decreasing the value of the bifurcation parameter ( e.g. , the level of AMPK * or rapamycin * ) , such that other processes are in a pseudo steady state , which slowly changes , as the bifurcation parameter is varied .
Simulations were performed with the bifurcation parameter gradually increasing ( from a sufficiently small value ) and also gradually decreasing ( from a sufficiently large value ) to find stable steady states and the lower and upper bounds of stable limit cycles for values of the bifurcation parameter of interest .
Two - dimensional bifurcation analyses were performed similarly .
We allowed one parameter to vary while holding the other at a fixed value .
We then repeated this procedure for different values of the second parameter .
The numerical methods described above , in contrast to continuation methods implemented in software tools such as AUTO and MatCont , do not allow for characterization of unstable steady states or unstable limit cycles , but with these methods , it is possible to analyze the ( large ) system of ODEs of interest , for which continuation methods are prohibitively inefficient .
In the sensitivity analysis of Fig . 8 , we performed two series of one - dimensional bifurcation analyses for each of the 22 parameters considered .
In the first of the two series , the bifurcation parameter was the level of AMPK * .
In all cases , we considered levels of AMPK * from 0 to 106 copies per cell .
In the second of the two series , the bifurcation parameter was the level of rapamycin * .
In all cases , we considered levels of rapamycin * from 0 to 105 copies per cell .
In each series , we considered 17 different values for one of the 22 parameters : we set Pm = Pm , 0 × 10n / 4 for n = − 8 , … , + 8 , where m is an index , in the range [ 1 , … , 22 ] , that identifies the parameter and Pm , 0 is the nominal value of the parameter given in Table 1 .
The results from each series of bifurcation analyses were used to find the range of values for parameter Pm for which the following pattern , illustrated in Fig .
C ( S2 File ) , holds true : 1 ) low AMBRA 1 phosphorylation and high EIF4EBP 1 phosphorylation at low values of the bifurcation parameter , 2 ) oscillations in AMBRA 1 and EIF4EBP 1 phosphorylation at intermediate values of the bifurcation parameter , and 3 ) high AMBRA 1 phosphorylation and low EIF4EBP 1 phosphorylation at high values of the bifurcation parameter .
The ranges so found are reported in Fig . 8 .
