All procedures with animals were approved by Douglas Institute Facility Animal Care Committee and McGill University Animal Care Committee , in line with the guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care .
Adult male Sprague - Dawley rats ( 2 - 3 months old , weighing 250 - 300 g at the time of experiment ; Charles River , Saint Constant , QC , Canada ) were used in the experiments .
The animals were housed individually in a controlled environment with a regular 12 h : 12 h LD cycle ( ∼ 200 lux in the light periods ) in an ambient temperature of 21 ± 2 ° C .
Regular chow and water were available ad libitum .
In all experiments , animals were treated with either 0.1 mL of purified turpentine oil ( TURP ) ( Riedel - deHaen , Sleeze , Germany ) or 0.1 mL of sterile physiological saline by intramuscular ( I.M . ) injection into the right gastrocnemius muscle ( hind - limb ) .
In one experiment , animals were treated with human recombinant ( hr ) IL - 1Ra ( provided by Dr . Stephen Poole , National Institute for Biological Standards and Control , Hertfordshire , UK ) .
Animals were treated intraperitoneally ( I.P . ) at a dose of 1 mg / kg at 0 , 4 , 8 , and 12 h after TURP treatment .
The hrIL - 1Ra was dissolved in physiological saline to a concentration of 1 mg / mL , and control animals were treated similarly with an equal volume of physiological saline .
The times of treatment and sacrifice varied depending on the experiment .
Animals were sacrificed by decapitation , blood was collected by trunk bleed into sterile tubes and serum was isolated by immediate centrifugation at 4000 rpm and 4 ° C for 10 min .
Aliquots were made and samples frozen at − 80 ° C until use .
Livers , hearts , kidneys and spleens were collected upon sacrifice , frozen on dry ice and stored at − 80 ° C until use .
Analgesics were not used in our study , primarily because of the potential impact on some of our endpoint measures : Analgesics were shown to alter inflammatory responses and to affect the levels of pro - inflammatory cytokines [30] , [31] .
Moreover , analgesic treatment has impacts on circadian rhythms and on clock gene expression [32] , [33] .
Additionally , the pain experienced by the rats upon injection of the dose of TURP used in our study ( 0.1 mL ) is relatively minor , compared to the effects of the higher dose of 0.6 mL of TURP used in some of our previous studies [34] , and the animals did not exhibit any outward signs of distress nor any pain - induced vocalization .
All injections during the dark phase ( ZT 12 - ZT 0 ) were performed under dim red light .
When animals were to be sacrificed during the dark phase , they were taken out of the room in a lightproof box and were not exposed to light until less than a minute before sacrifice .
Temperature was monitored using remote radio - biotelemetry ( Data Science International , St Paul , MN , USA ) as previously described [35] .
Briefly , two weeks before the experiment , animals were abdominally implanted with pre - calibrated temperature - sensitive radio transmitters ( TA 10TA - F40 , Data Sciences International ) under isoflurane anaesthesia .
Two days before the experiment , animals were placed on individual receiver boards containing an antenna to monitor the temperature output frequency ( Hz ) every 10 min until sacrifice .
The temperature frequency was converted into degrees centigrade with Dataquest software ( Data Sciences International ) .
The baseline 24 h temperature fluctuation was established two days prior to treatment in each animal to ensure a normal diurnal profile .
Before each of the following three experiments , animals were habituated for 2 weeks in a 12 h : 12 h LD cycle with daily handling at least one week before the experiment .
This involved taking the animals out of their cages and manipulating them in the same way they would be at the time of injection ( i.e. , for handling prior to I.M . injection , animals held at the side of the experimenter and their rear gastrocnemious muscle revealed ; prior to I.P . injections , animals wrapped in the same towel as for the injections and positioned such as to receive an injection ) .
Experiment 1 : The effect of a morning TURP injection on clock gene expression : Animals were treated with either TURP or saline at ZT 2 ( 2 h after lights on given that Zeitgeber Time 0 [ ZT 0 ] corresponds to lights on and ZT 12 to lights off ) .
Animals were then sacrificed 2 , 6 , 10 , 14 , 18 , and 22 h after treatment ( i.e. ZT 4 , ZT 8 , ZT 12 , ZT 16 , ZT 20 and ZT 0 time of sacrifice ( TOS ) , respectively ) .
Each group included 4 animals .
All measurements for clock genes and cytokines were performed at the TOS .
Experiment 2 : The effect of injection time on TURP - induced changes of clock gene expression : Animals were treated with either TURP or saline at 4 time points over 24 h : ZT 2 , ZT 8 , ZT 14 and ZT 20 time of injection ( TOI ) .
Animals were then sacrificed exactly 10 h after the TOI ( i.e. , ZT 12 , ZT 18 , ZT 0 and ZT 6 TOS , respectively ) as this time corresponds with the maximal fever response in response to TURP [27] .
There were 5 animals per time point each for TURP and saline .
Measurements for clock genes and cytokines were performed at the TOS .
Experiment 3 : The effects of anti - inflammatory IL - 1Ra treatment on TURP - induced changes of clock gene expression : Animals were treated with either TURP or saline at ZT 2 and sacrificed at ZT 12 or ZT 16 ( 10 h and 14 h after TOI , respectively ) .
In each of the injection groups , animals were treated with either hrIL - 1Ra or saline making a total of 4 groups per time of sacrifice ( saline - saline , saline - hrIL - 1Ra , TURP - saline , and TURP - IL - 1Ra ) .
The ZT 12 group had a total of 3 hrIL - 1Ra treatments at 0 , 4 and 8 h after TOI ( i.e. , ZT 2 , ZT 6 , and ZT 10 , respectively ) and the ZT 16 group had 4 hrIL - 1Ra treatments at 0 , 4 , 8 and 12 h after TOI ( i.e. , ZT 2 , ZT 6 , ZT 10 and ZT 14 , respectively ) .
Given the short half - life of IL - 1Ra , multiple injections were required for a full effect on fever and IL - 6 [36] .
Further , IL - 1Ra blocks the upregulation of IL - 6 and to completely attenuate its response , IL - 1Ra must be administered early in the TURP time - course when IL - 6 begins to be produced [36] .
The human carcinoma HepG 2 cells were provided by Dr . Cindy Goodyer ( McGill University , Montreal ) .
Cells were seeded in 6 - well plates at a density of 0.3 × 106 cells per plate in Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) ( Life Technologies , Burlington , ON ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Life Technologies ) , 2 mM L - glutamine ( Life Technologies ) , and 100 mg / mL penicillin - streptomycin and grown to confluency at 37 ° C in 5 % CO 2 .
One day ( 24 h ) before the first time point , growth media was replaced with a starvation media containing 0.5 % FBS .
On the day of the experiment , cells were transferred to a serum - free media containing the various concentrations of human recombinant IL - 6 ( CedarLane , Burlington , ON ) .
Cells were then washed with cold PBS , lysed in Trizol ( Life Technologies ) , and frozen at − 80 ° C until use .
Serum concentrations of IL - 6 , IL - 1Ra and TNF α were obtained in duplicate using an in - house - developed sandwich enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) ( secondary enzymes supplied by NIBSC , Potters Bar , UK ) as previously described [35] .
The detection limit was between 30 and 50 pg / mL for IL - 6 , TNF α and IL - 1Ra , as indicated in figure legends .
The inter - assay variability was below 4 % and the intra - assay variability was below 9 % for all experiments .
RNA was extracted using Trizol ( Life Technologies ) according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol .
cDNA was synthesized using the MultiScribe reverse - transcription kit ( Life Technologies ) according to manufacturer ’ s instructions .
In all rat tissues , clock gene expression was assessed using SYBR Green quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) ( Life Technologies , 7500 Real - Time PCR System ) .
Primers for clock genes Per 1 , Per 2 and Rev - erb α , were designed using Primer 3 software ( sequences in Table S1 ) .
The control primers tested were Histone H1 , HPRT ( hypoxanthine - guanine phosphoribosyl transferase ) , GAPDH ( glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate ) , Ubi ( ubiquitin ) , and Tbp ( TATA box binding protein ) ( sequences in Table S1 ) [37] .
In order to determine the most stable control genes over time and condition the GeNorm v 3.3 software was used [38] .
For each experiment conducted , two control genes were selected ( Table S2 ) .
In the human HepG 2 cell line , mRNA expression was assessed with quantitative PCR using TaqMan probes ( Life Technologies ) as outlined by the manufacturer .
From a set of 5 genes ( B2M ; beta - 2 - microglobin , PPiA ; peptidylprolyl isomerase A , TBP ; TATA - binding protein , RPLPO ; large ribosomal protein , GAPDH ; glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase , ACTB ; beta - actin ) , the most stable control genes over both time and treatment were determined using GeNorm as described above : B2M ( H200984230 _ m1 ) and PPiA ( Hs 04194521 _ s1 ) .
For clock gene expression , the following probe sets were used : Per 1 ( H200242988 _ m1 ) , Per 2 ( Hs 00256143 _ m1 ) , Rev - erb α ( Hs 00253876 _ m1 ) , Serum amyloid A2 ( Hs 00605928 _ g1 ) and Haptoglobin ( Hs 01667582 _ m1 ) .
The relative mRNA expression of each clock gene was assessed by normalizing to the geometric mean of the two control genes , and then to a reference sample , using the 2 − Δ Δ CT method [39] .
In Experiments 1 and 2 , the temperature curve differences , cytokine induction over time and changes in clock gene RNA levels were analyzed by two - way ANOVAs with factors Time and Condition .
In Experiment 3 , the variation in temperature over time in all the groups was analyzed with a three - way ANOVA with factors Time and Condition for TURP and Condition for IL - 1Ra ; and group differences in cytokine induction and clock gene expression were analyzed with a one - way ANOVA .
Finally , clock gene expression in HepG 2 genes was analyzed using two - way ANOVAs with factors Time and Condition .
For ANOVAs , significant effects were decomposed using Tukey ’ s post hoc analysis for pair - wise comparisons when applicable .
Induction of SAA 2 and HP gene expression in HepG 2 cells was analyzed with Student t - tests .
Statistical significance was set to p < 0.05 and results are reported as mean ± SEM .
